would send that signal it would allow
manufacturers to
import more electric vehicles confident
that the government is backing it in
and to help with that sticker price to
bring electric vehicles down to the same
price as their fuel
their petrol or diesel models
you could also remove the import taxes
faced on electric vehicles so that
they'd have a cheaper sticker price when
you drive them off the lot
that will help with uptake because
ultimately it's cheaper to maintain an
electric vehicle
it's cheaper to fuel it and what we can
what this the federal government could
do is also make it
more affordable so that people in the
middle of the market can actually buy
one
richie merzian thank you very much my
pleasure
financially for many people 2020 has
been
a disaster research shows many are
stressed and desperate
and eight percent of australians have
used the services of debt management or
credit repair companies an industry that
consumer advocates
say needs tighter regulation the law
reports damian carrick has been looking
at
the research damien good afternoon to
you who commissioned this research
uh lorna it was commissioned by the
consumer advocate uh
the consumer legal the consumer law uh
the consumer
action law center uh which are kind of a
consumer advocate group
and they say that it's a statistically
significant survey of over 2
000 people and as you pointed out they
found that over 8
of respondents said that during the
course of 2020 they had
used the services of of credit repair or
debt management
companies now if that
if you can extrapolate out those figures
that's between 1.4 and 1.9 million
australians
who would fall into that category the
research
also goes on to say that 27
of australians have used these services
not just in 2020 but at any point
and 15 have used it just in those
services just in the last two years
so clearly given that uh the research
also finds that
two two out of four forty two out of
five of us or forty percent of us are
feeling uh
kind of strong financial pressures at
the moment there's clearly a big market
for this kind of service
what specific services are there is it
pay day lending is it borrowing in
advance
uh what what is it no it's to help you
well what happens when you use those
services and you find yourself in
in strife so basically these are these
are services which help you negotiate
with your creditors
okay so it'll help you sometimes help
you you know better
create create a budget for yourself but
also to deal with your debts
to deal with your creditors to negotiate
with your creditors
uh and sometimes that can be actually
you know
helping ward off your home being
repossessed
or staving off bankruptcy or negotiating
bankruptcy it's
those sorts of services is there any
regulations surrounding this industry
then
lorna there isn't uh essentially it's
it's a non-regulated industry the
government has announced it the federal
government has announced its intention
to create a licensing system
and you'd have to be for instance a fit
and proper person uh
to be uh kind of in the industry and
obtain a license and as part of the
licensing system you would uh
say yeah okay we'll we'll um be bound by
um sort of non-litigation dispute
resolution systems
but consumer advocates are saying that
doesn't go far enough what we need are
uk
style laws which mean that you these
sorts of players
need to act in the best interests of of
their clients
not just offer these services which are
often not fit for purpose
expensive and can kind of leave people
vulnerable people
in an even worse situation than when
they started
damian carrick thanks for that you can
hear more about debt management and
credit repair companies on the law
report with damien this afternoon 5 30
on rn or as a podcast at any time
now let's catch up with the day's sport
tony armstrong is live for us in melvin
afternoon nice to see you again
tony we've been talking about the
cricket we've been talking about who
might be on the team sheet and i gather
you've got some news for me on that for
thursday
yes finally a bit of good news for a
young man cameron greene
21 years old out of western australia he
looks set to make his debut justin
langer confirmed that
this morning this is though under the
proviso that he gets through
his fitness tests and is cleared to play
he has to complete
concussion protocols after being hit in
the head off the back of a return shot
from jasprit
boomera last friday so still working his
way through that but justin langer said
green is in good spirits obviously he's
going to make his test debut
and he's walking around with a beaming
smile on his face this selection does
come off the back
of an unbeaten 125 knot
out and three wickets in a recent tour
match against india so if he does get up
all the best to him absolutely a bit of
an end of an
error in the afl at collingwood yes it
is i got to spend a couple of the years
there so i know this man well but eddie
mcguire
the president of the collingwood
football club has announced that he will
be stepping down
from that role at the end of 2021 that
will mark 23
seasons in that main role he took over
in 1998 when the club was struggling
financially and on the field throughout
his tenure though
um there has been a little bit of
controversy that's never been too far
away from him
in 2013 the adam good saga of course he
was a big part of that
and in 2016 he uh i guess suggested that
he might drown caroline wilson
um this is what he had to say at the
member forum about what it meant to him
back in 1998 it was my time
to stand up for our beloved collingwood
instead of calling on others to do
something for our club fake tune my way
i'm proud that i answered i've given
everything i have to this position
now it is time for me to set the
platform for the club going forward
i will stand down at the end of next
year and i'll spend the rest of my time
as president of this club
setting up a new era of collingwood
sounds emotional doesn't he tony um
to the basketball the wnbl had their
awards ceremony last night
yeah they did and the adelaide lightning
steph tower has won
the wnbl mvp she edged out
liz cambay so she pulled 73 votes over
the condensed
13 match season liz cambage pulled 67
whilst lauren nicholson
polled 65. talbot was also named
defensive player of the year
and got an all-wmbl first team selection
the fires shiloh hills daughter of shane
hill she won youth player of the year
and their coach
shannon sieben was also named coach of
the year the finals
start tomorrow night as well as we come
to towards the end of a great wnbl
season
um finally tell me what's this year
hearing about a salary cap breach in
supernetball
yes so the west coast uh the west coast
fever have been fined three hundred
thousand dollars for salary cap
breaches and they've also been stripped
of 12 competition points
in the upcoming season for serious and
deliberate salary cap breaches
the club made payments of 127 954
above the salary cap in 2018 where they
made the grand final and then in 2019
when they finished six they breached the
cap by 168 thousand
six hundred and fifty nine dollars so
half of this fine will be suspended over
the next three years and
luckily the coach stacey marinkovich
who's also the national coach she hasn't
been
found of any wrongdoing so she's been
cleared of that and
earlier this year as well the adelaide
thunderbirds will find a hundred
thousand dollars
90 of which were suspended as well so
there's a bit of salary cap wroting it
seems going on in super netball at the
moment
wow interesting tony thanks very much
for that no worries
we are seeing some wild weather aren't
we around the country let's check
check in on the forecast with nate byrne
a trough and low pressure system that's
been battering the east coast has
remained relatively stationary overnight
but it is starting to shift
southwards and it's taking the wild
weather with it
the trough is really helping to cause
those onshore winds that are
bringing the heavy rainfall it's also
been causing some pretty hefty swells
that today are shifting out of
southeastern queensland new south wales
still looking at swells potentially six
meters or more
although that should ease as we move
through tomorrow the rainfall though
will continue
through the day today especially in new
south wales through the northern half of
the state we're likely to see the
heaviest of the totals
southeastern queensland and the rest of
the new south wales east coast also
expecting some wet weather
also the tropics have been quite active
now that will remain a feature in the
coming week as the monsoon potentially
starts to develop
meanwhile in the east all that humidity
means that things are looking pretty
unsettled for quite some time to come
fronts coming through the south will
help trigger more wet and stormy weather
and over the next week we're expecting
some pretty decent totals
for large parts of eastern australia
though not as much
heavy rainfall as we saw earlier this
weekend for your
wednesday we've got a lot of wet weather
around the east to shower two in
brisbane it's getting to 30 there's more
falls on the way for sydney 27 will be
the top
canberra has a possible storm to go with
its showers 24 the top there
melbourne should be cloudy but mostly
dry it's getting to 24 as well and
hobart's cloudy too 17 the top
over in adelaide you've got a shower or
two 27 degrees
perth's got a sunny 31 and for darwin
some more showers
likely with a storm top of 33.
and that is abc news for now a reminder
you can keep up to date on all the
latest news across all your devices at
news.abc.net
and also on abc eye view i'm lorna
dunkley thank you for your company this
lunch time coming up on the abc news
channel
next i'll have much more on the top
stories including the latest
weather warnings for northern new south
wales and southeast queensland
we are one but we are many
and from the lands on earth we call
we share a dream
we are
trees
[Music]
all right so let's all please bring our
again
we're actually looking at the site of
one of the greatest crimes of humanity
depending on what character i'm doing it
makes me more brave
i've always enjoyed people who have
beliefs that they're certain about
real sincere belief is like rocket fuel
it's more than just comedy abc tv
plus starts january 1. specs and specs
returns for a special episode
celebrating music
of the 2010s guests include kate miller
heike vance joy claire hooper and luke
mcgregor
see you very soon australia the specs
and specs 2010 special
sunday on abc and eye view
today flood evacuation orders in
northern new south wales
where river levels continue to rise
[Music]
one of underworld figure tony macbel's
convictions for drug trafficking is
overturned due to the lawyer x scandal
actor craig mclaughlin expresses relief
at being found not guilty of indecent
assault
and the prime minister calls for urgent
dialogue with beijing
over the future of australian coal
exports
i would hope that we could get to the
point of having some mature discussions
about these issues
[Music]
hello welcome to abc news i'm lorna
dunkley our top story today the severe
weather that is continuing to lash many
parts of the east coast
residents in northern new south wales
remain on high alert with heavy rain
blanketing the area further north and
parts of southeast queensland have
recorded hundreds of millimeters of rain
since friday
with wind gusts of up to 100 kilometers
an hour
we have reporters in some of the worst
affected areas beginning with jake
lapham who's in bellingen in new south
wales
good afternoon lorna yeah they're
extremely wet i'm just going to jump out
of the frame so your viewers can see the
river behind me that is the bellinger
river and that is a bridge underneath
there now you can't see it because it's
been fully submerged and it's been like
that
all morning we've had 250 millimeters
of rain here in this area in the past 24
hours
and the intensity of the rain in the
last few hours has prompted
authorities to issue a major flood
warning for this river now they say
major flooding
is occurring upstream at thora at the
moment and that major flooding is
expected downstream here in bellingen
later this morning later this afternoon
rather they say river
river levels are rising rapidly and
further rises are expected now the usual
uh announcements from the ses have
followed that don't drive through flood
waters don't play in flood waters
and it seems as though for the most part
locals are heating that but
given the river is expected to rise it's
all the more important to
to stay out of those flood waters and
jake um how concerned are
locals there what are they saying
yeah it's funny lorna for the past few
days they've been pretty relaxed about
it all they have they've seen flooding
come and go and it's not the first time
the breach behind me has gone under but
the intensity of this particular storm
is surprising some just
in the last few moments locals have come
down and said yeah this is a pretty good
flood
they've been quite surprised given it's
been raining for five days and it hasn't
reached
really high levels but in the last few
hours it's really picked up i spoke to
a gentleman named mick a local earlier
let's have a listen to mick
it's beautiful to see a bit a bit of a
flood here but it's not a big one
yeah i've seen some seen a couple of
really good ones started
what was a big one in 2007 eight
something like that
i think there is a very strong sense
that rather floods than bushfires
given that 12 months ago yeah there was
very much that concern
all right jake for now thank you let's
go to bronwyn herbert who's in
tumblr um hi there bronwyn what's the
latest you're hearing from there
there really isn't uh an exodus it's
more the ses uh
warning people that they're going to be
cut off effectively from
other centres and the residents here
are okay with that they've got supplies
they're organised
and they're really um yeah the the
people that we've spoken to
uh uh are okay with that situation even
though the ses has taken the cautious
approach of
those that um that they could head to
the evacuation
center uh close by
you've just got to go with it and relax
try and relax
but we have got a good system here in
toboggan now we call the cat team
and each part of the village is broken
up into
15 houses and i'm a coordinator for my
section
we ring or text everybody about what's
happening
i was just in the middle of doing a text
to them now 2017
we lost over 80 odd cars in the village
where i think now everybody has been
told
to move their cars we do have now places
across the river where
they can go and park well from bronwyn
then over to
dominic cainsdale who's at snapper rocks
hi dominic the wet weather is easing
there but what of the surf conditions
yes well the sun is out the rain has
disappeared and the winds have certainly
eased but a hazardous surf warning
remains in place
as you can see still very rough surf
conditions strong swells
surf life saving queensland is reminding
people that like monday
like sunday where on monday we saw
swells of five to ten meters
uh people should stay out of the water
but these conditions have brought in a
torrent
of foam all around the goal close uh
literally
uh circling one of the surf clubs up in
currumbin
and here these rough surf conditions
have been a bit of a playground
for a few of the locals we spoke to a
few of the grommets who have just been
loving it much better feels like summer
again
yeah you know well we were here
yesterday as well but it wasn't as big
yeah you get so scared you get folded
onto like all the rocks and stuff it's
so fun
oh we might go for a surf after see if
the low tide brings us any waves but
oh just missed a big one then they're
certainly enjoying it there
uh dominic uh conditions are easing well
what's expected for the weather for the
rest of the day and into tomorrow
uh so the beauty of bureau of
meteorology says this heavy rainfall
we've seen in the past few days is
certainly easing
along the coast that low system will
move inland hopefully delivering some
rain much needed rain further inland in
western queensland
one good point to note is that tides are
still going to be expected to be higher
we saw
what is expected to be early this
morning the highest tide of the year
on the gold coast 1.8 metres on the gc
hundreds of millimeters of rain that
fell in the hinterland 800 meters over
three days in springbrook
that's still slowly making its way out
way out through the waterways
so still some flooding around creeks uh
in the valley areas of the gold coast
and properties along canals including in
broad beach waters
should just be extra vigilant of those
higher tides
expected later today and into tomorrow
but
the outlook while it's sunny now the
bureau says we can still expect
a few more showers and a few more
overcast days to come all right dominic
thanks for that dominic cainsdale
bronwyn herbert and jake lapham thank
you to you all a full weather forecast
coming up later this hour
we've been talking about trade
diplomatic spats with china and
shadow resources minister ed husick has
just been speaking in sydney so let's
bring you those comments now
reports overnight that china is
looking to lock out coal exports
from that country come as a big concern
i was particularly concerned for the
coal mining communities across the
country
who depend on these exports for their
livelihood
if you look at it coal mining in this
country generates
roughly 46 000 jobs and
when you consider the export dollars
that are earned
through this sector nearly 70 billion
there is a lot riding
on sorting this issue out from my point
of view
and from the point of view of many
others in the opposition and also within
the sector
we do need to get out of the federal
coalition
a game plan to get us out of this again
a lot of jobs
and a lot of money riding on this and we
do need to see definite plans
uh from the government on how to resolve
this a lot of it is going to involve
diplomacy and being able to either
establish with china and improve the
diplomatic relationship there
because this is more about diplomacy
than it is about trade
the other thing is to having a game plan
for a much more assertive china
on the world stage working with allies
and aligned nations
to deal with this let's be quite clear
what china is doing here
is wrong they should not be blocking our
high quality product
out of that market this is not a trade
issue this is a diplomatic one
and our coal mining communities should
not be hurt as a result of this
and so we do need uh to get an answer on
that the other point i'd make is this
you know we've had the coalition always
willing to make announcements
about trade agreements always wanting to
get the headlines
about the latest trade agreement that
they've announced and what i think a lot
of australians will be questioning right
now is
if we've signed all these trade
agreements particularly with a country
like
china why is it that that trade
agreement seems to count for nothing
right now
in protecting australian coal exports
and importantly defending australian
jobs because we were always told that
this was part of the deal with
with these agreements that would be good
for jobs and good for the economy so we
do need to get
to the bottom of that as well and the
coalition needs to
um explain why these agreements don't
seem to be working in the national
interest
at a time when we need them the most so
i
as i said we for the sake of coal mining
communities across the country
we need to see a game plan on this we
need to see a game plan as well on trade
diversification
uh too broadly because it's not just in
terms of resources but agriculture as
well
has been hurting with some of these
recent decisions that are coming out of
china
and again the pressure is on the
government apply the energy
come up with the answers protect jobs
and ensure the economy can perform
strongly into the future
and with that i'm more than happy to
take any questions
okay well we'll leave it at that thank
you
sorry
will to um or is it too late well
where uh obviously they can forge and
improve
diplomatic outcome by all means it
should happen
uh but it's obvious and i mean i think
it's blatantly obvious
that there is a breakdown in the
relationship and we're having a
situation
uh clearly where we do need to see a
coordinated action between as i said
earlier allies and aligned nations
to say okay you know china's wanting to
assert itself
it's doing it in particular ways and we
do need to work with other nations who
share a similar view that we need to
respect a rules-based approach when it
comes to trade
trade delivers obvious benefits to the
two trading partners involved
and we do need to see that that gets
maintained
it basically works at the detriment of
both ourselves and china
where this trading relationship breaks
down but clearly we need to work
with others on this and get that done
the other part to that
uh question that you've put to me tom is
in
and when i think about in particular
agriculture
uh finding a trade diversification
strategy that works and quickly
you know we've put a lot of eggs into
the one basket we now need to find out
how we can do differently the
coalition's known this for quite some
time
they've been in power for seven years
we've been trading with china in
agriculture it's been our top
export market for a decade
so you know everyone could tell where
this was going but the coalition seemed
to be slow
in developing something longer term to
respond well
now we're running out of time and we do
need them to step up
with energy developing a solution on
that
in terms of coal you know for the
countries that are exporting more now to
china
those countries that had benefited from
trade elsewhere from some of these
countries or from coal
from these now exporting countries to
china there will be a void
so we need to work with companies to see
identify new markets for example
india bangladesh vietnam are all
obviously markets where we've got some
prospect
of being able to export to but again
what's the game plan from the government
on this
we seem to be getting a lot of words and
not much action out of them when it
comes to these issues
are you concerned that our coal exports
to china and artists in
serious peril and do you have any
concerns for the future of
iron ore as well so i'm very concerned
about the future of coal exports
to china if you look at it in terms of
resources we export
something like uh 15 of our resources
excluding iron ore to china when you add
iron ore in it's something like 30
so it's it's helped support jobs here in
australia it's supported investment
and obviously economic growth so
clearly it is something to be concerned
about if we're not getting
our product through obviously there
might be other potential markets
that we can go to but the question is
price and volume
so we've you know i'm very careful about
uh suggesting that there's
a silver bullet we can fire off here
clearly these are complex things
when it comes to iron ore again you know
it's demonstrated a huge amount of value
or generated a huge amount of value
particularly for western australia
what we don't need at this time where
we're begging to see some certainty and
a clear game
plan out of government we don't need to
see
some within government putting forward
ideas like
imposing levies on iron ore and making
our product
less attractive and encouraging
substitution of our product
as a result of some of those bone-headed
calls that we've
experienced in the last 24 hours let's
not inflame the situation but rather
work our way through it so that we can
protect those exports
longer term but there is something as i
said uh
with us working with other nations on
this issue
you mentioned that what china is doing
here is
wrong what does a good relationship look
like
from the chinese side how much respect
is australia
uh well in terms of uh from the chinese
i'll leave that to the the chinese um to
explain in part your question um i think
we've recognized for quite some time
the value of a strong bilateral
relationship with china but
as has been evidenced lately it's not
working
it has broken down it does require uh
diplomacy to sort this out
and mind you it's a two-way street as
well
people in china need to be willing to
work on the relationship as much as
we are the reality is and i've said this
elsewhere so forgive me for repeating
myself
but you know if you can have a bob hawk
pick up a phone to his counterpart
or john howe would pick up the phone as
well
um you know it's really a problem for us
if scott morrison can't do that as prime
minister here
to try and sort these uh these issues
out
and so but having said that you know
clearly
if you've got a lot of other countries i
think it's about nearly a dozen
off the top of my head countries that
are being given approval to export coal
to china and we're the only ones locked
out that is wrong
we should not be locked out this is
something that we should
absolutely object to but i also come
back to the point i made earlier
you know if we're supposed to have this
super duper agreement trade agreement
with
china why isn't it working at the time
we need it most this should not be
permissible under our trade agreements
and we should be having coal going
through and as high quality product
as i've said earlier and you know
there's benefit to china as much as
there is benefit usually to us
all right okay thanks everyone
so that is the shadow resources minister
ed husic they're very concerned he says
what china is doing
is a wrong big concern for the coal
mining community
and he would like to see more definitive
action
from the federal government we'll
continue to cover this story and in fact
we've got our business
reporter on location stephen long is at
newcastle cole port so we'll get the
reaction from there
later this hour now notorious underworld
figure tony macbel has had
one of his drug convictions overturned
because of the lawyer x
scandal reporter damian mciver has the
details from melbourne
this was something of a surprise
development this morning victoria's
court of appeal has been
hearing an appeal launched by tony
mockbell who's
one of melbourne's most notorious
underworld figures in
2012 he was given a 30-year sentence for
a range of
drug trafficking charges and this
morning the court of appeal
decided to quash one of those
convictions which related to the
importation of a commercial quantity of
cocaine back in the year 2000
now of course this is all linked to the
fact that one of mock bell's lawyers was
nicola gabo who's since been revealed as
a police informant in a scandal which is
rocked through
victoria's legal system now the court
has
set aside its decision on whether to
acquit
mock bill or to pursue a re-trial but
commonwealth prosecutors today said
regardless
of what the court decides they won't be
seeking any further action against mock
bell given he's already
served his time on this particular
conviction now i should point out that
although this conviction has been
quashed mock bell remains in bars he's
still
behind bars sorry he's still serving
time on other drug offences
so is that then the end of the matter no
it certainly isn't uh so the court has
adjourned all other matters until
next year it's already been a lengthy
process to get to this point and he
uh tony macwell is ultimately hoping to
overturn all of his convictions we've
seen
another a number of other convicted
criminals uh pursue similar action
because of the involvement of nicola
gabo in the so-called
lawyer x scandal and this promises to
play out for many more months to come
damien mcgiver thank you actor craig
mclaughlin has been found not guilty of
seven
charges of indecent assault and six
charges of common assault
reporter christian silva joins us now
from
melbourne good afternoon christian what
did the magistrate say in this case
good afternoon lorna these charges
related back to allegations from
2014 when mr mclaughlin was
an actor in the production rocky horror
show
there were a range of allegations that
were made against mr mclaughlin that he
had kissed
women without their consent that he had
touched them inappropriately
without their consent those were some of
the claims that were made now in court
this morning in the magistrates court
magistrate belinda wallington dismissed
all 13
charges against mr mcglock against mr
mclaughlin
he has always maintained his innocence
and said that he'd never done anything
that was wrong
she accepted some of the evidence though
that were given by these women
she described some of she described
these complainants as brave and honest
women however
the evidence that was provided just
couldn't prove beyond reasonable doubt
that the charges could be made out
against
mr mclaughlin magistrate
uh wellington also was critical
of the way mr mclaughlin's legal team
questioned some of the women when they
were up giving evidence
in november as well what reaction has
there been from
craig mclaughlin himself well mr
mclaughlin
definitely looked relieved when the
verdict was handed down
not guilty for all 13 charges
shortly after that he did come out to
speak to the media in sydney
now while this case was being heard in
melbourne
mr mclaughlin actually appeared via
video link
from sydney the way the courts have been
operating here for the last little while
have meant that a lot of
proceedings have been done via video
link let's take a listen to what he had
to say to reporters a few moments ago
maintained a dignified and respectful
silence for the past
almost three years
and put our trust in the law
and here we are today i would like to
very quickly publicly acknowledge and
thank mr stuart little more qc for his
exceptional captaincy his extraordinary
energy
and his humanity
mr mclaughlin says he's not going to say
any more for the time being but did
tell the reporters that he'll have
plenty more to say in the new year
victoria has apologized for delays after
the service was overwhelmed last night
by more than 2 000
calls for help across melbourne
emergency managers insist
all critically unwell victorians
received timely care
stephanie ferriere has more temperatures
were still hovering around 32 degrees
last night around 8 o'clock in the city
and the director of emergency management
at ambulance victoria justin dunlop has
told abc radio melbourne
that the heat coupled with people's
pre-existing conditions
led to this spike in non-urgent calls
and there were around a thousand of
those
last night the ambulance union says more
than a hundred of those patients were
forced to endure lengthy delays
and mr dunlop has apologised to those
who are in pain
while having to wait but he says that
the ambulance service
had to prioritize around a thousand
other calls
from people whose lives were immediately
in danger
and all of those patients received
timely care
now ambulance victoria did issue this
alert about the delays just before nine
o'clock
last night and the situation wasn't
restored to normal
until after 12 30 this morning the
ambulance union
says that some of the paramedics were
breaking down in tears due to the
pressure last night that they had worked
through their mill breaks
and that extra crews were calling called
in to help
they say that the whole workforce is
suffering from a shortage because
paramedics are exhausted and fatigued
after lockdown
but mr dunlop says that extra students a
large
number of those have been brought
forward to help with deal with any of
these
surges and he says that additional
resources are normally also put on
just in anticipation of some of those
extreme events like heat waves or
thunderstorm
asthma warnings but there was nothing
last night to indicate that there was
going to be
any problem he has also denied that a
recent upgrade to the software
at the emergency call center contributed
in any way to this delay
now while ambulance victoria didn't
foresee this spike
last night they have said that there's
been a steady increase in the number of
people
seeking medical care since the lockdowns
here in victoria ended
and the ambulance union says that some
people
are either reluctant to go or simply
can't get in to see their gp
so they are urging people to go and get
that checkup
or to call nurse on call and get on top
of any health problem
before it escalates to them needing to
call an ambulance like we saw last night
stephanie ferrier reporting joe biden's
election win has been
confirmed after electoral college
members formally cast votes for
him to replace donald trump on january
the 20th
in a prime time speech mr biden called
on americans to turn
the page on the trump era and said not
even a pandemic
could extinguish the flame of democracy
the u.s
today became the first country to record
a staggering
300 thousand lives lost from covet 19.
barters greg jennings reports it opened
a new chapter
as healthcare workers rolled up their
sleeves for the start of a mass
vaccination campaign anticipation
matched the scale of america's exposure
after 16 million cases and climbing the
fight back starts with a few
sharp shots doctors nurses and
supervisors on the front line
spoke of a vaccine as a peace settlement
i hope this march will begin into the
end of a very
painful time in our history and so it
went at 145 locations around the country
just under 3 million doses will be in
freezes within two days
we can meet our goal of vaccinating
every american who wants it by the end
of the second quarter of 2021.
if the vaccine's arrival marks the
beginning of the end of the pandemic
then this day
also marks the terminal phase of donald
trump's presidency
his legal challenges to the election
have all flopped and from here on
his 75 million popular votes don't count
for much either
the nation's just taken a leap towards
electing its next president
and it won't be him twenty votes for the
honorable joseph r
biden for president of the united states
in pennsylvania and 49 other state
legislatures
the electoral college has delivered its
verdict
california pushed joe biden's tally
above the magic 270.
is 55 knows zero
no rogue votes and no upsets either the
flame of democracy was
lit in this nation a long time ago and
we now know
nothing not even a pandemic or an abuse
of power
can extinguish that flame the results as
good as confirmed and will be by
congress when it counts the college
votes next month
dozens and dozens and dozens of legal
challenges to test the result
they were heard again and again and each
of the time they were heard they're
found to be without merit donald trump's
calmly parting ways with the man who
wouldn't back his claims of systemic
voter fraud
attorney general william barr but still
no concession from him there may never
be one
greg janet abc news washington
well canada has kicked off its
vaccination campaign
against covid19 injecting frontline
healthcare workers and nursing home
residents
the country is the third in the world to
administer the
pfizer biontech vaccine a second wave of
the coronavirus is ripping
through canada forcing several provinces
to clamp down on businesses and limit
social gatherings more than 60 percent
of canada's
13 000 coronavirus deaths have been in
aged care facilities
a new variant of coronavirus identified
in the uk
is being blamed for a sharp rise in
cases there across london
and the south east scientists will study
the new strain but health authorities
say at this stage
there is nothing to suggest that it
won't respond to a vaccine
steps are being taken to contain the
latest surge in infections
with london facing the toughest
restrictions from tomorrow
europe correspondent samantha hawley
reports
it really is a case of one step forward
and two steps back
we have identified a new variant of
coronavirus
which may be associated with the faster
spread the deadly virus has mutated
a thousand cases of the new variant in
60 local areas of
england have been identified so far
initial analysis
suggests that this variant is growing
faster than the existing variants
similar variants have been identified in
other countries over the last few months
london is a hot spot case numbers are
doubling as quickly as every five days
the city will be among those pushed back
into the highest
level of restrictions from wednesday
it's obviously going to be very hard to
do anything that we've planned in the
next few days
it's a sudden change but that's the
reality of this and
kind of expecting it really i think it's
a good idea
it seems really crowded and i think it's
a bit
crazy for it not to be tier three at the
moment
so i think it's a good thing the worry
now is what the new variant means for
the pfizer vaccine
that's been rolled out across the uk
advice so far is good
but testing is still underway i must
stress at this point
that there is currently nothing to
suggest that this variant is more likely
to cause serious disease
and the latest clinical advice is that
it's highly unlikely
that this mutation would fail to respond
to a vaccine
but it shows we've got to be vigilant
covert 19
is providing a large dose of
pre-christmas gloom
the boris johnson has promised a
reprieve
from restrictions between the 23rd and
the 27th
of december the problem with that is
scientists warn
it could lead to an even harsher
lockdown in january
it's looking like a grimmer christmas
and a not so happy
new year samantha hawley abc news
london germany has called on the
european union to speed up the approval
of a coronavirus vaccine the country's
health minister says the nation is ready
to start mass vaccinations within
24 hours but is being hamstrung by a
lack of regulatory approval
germany is imposing tougher restrictions
from tomorrow
closing all non-essential shops and
schools until the 10th of january
because of a continuing surge in cases
there
[Music]
you're watching abc news these are the
top stories this lunchtime
residents in parts of northern new south
wales have been ordered to evacuate as
flood waters
peak in the tweed river and heavy rain
continues
in southeast queensland rain has eased
but the highest tide of the year has
brought
huge amounts of foam onto beaches on the
gold
coast authorities are warning people to
stay vigilant as the severe weather
awning remains in place
tony mark bell has had one of his drug
convictions overturned as a result of
the lawyer x
scandal in 2012 the melbourne underworld
figure was jailed for 30 years for drug
trafficking
and launched a challenge earlier this
year the court of appeal reserved its
decision on whether to order a re-trial
or
that he receive an acquittal
a melbourne court has dismissed all
charges against actor craig mclaughlin
he has always strongly denied
allegations he indecently assaulted four
women
mr mclaughlin faced a long committal
hearing on
seven charges of indecent assault and
six charges of common assault
dating back to 2014.
and prime minister scott morrison has
warned china's acts of economic
punishment of australia could damage its
global reputation as a trading partner
chinese state media is reporting chinese
power plants have been directed
to stop imports of thermal coal from
australia
beijing's yet to confirm the reports but
it's being seen as yet another
escalation
in an increasingly bitter trade spat
let's talk more about that now so what's
at stake if
china stops taking australian coal well
it's important to note that the type of
coal being targeted here
which is thermal coal and not
metallurgical
coal typically thermal coal is used by
electricity stations while
metallurgical coal is used for things
like steel production
last year australia exported 26 billion
dollars worth of thermal coal to china
but
it is not actually our biggest customer
for the commodity
japan takes the vast majority china
second with 16
south korea a similar amount and taiwan
of exports so there could be the
possibility of finding another market
for the more than 50 ships currently
sitting
outside of chinese ports and if china
pulls the pin
it'll be about 3.9 billion dollars
worth but with emerging markets like
india and vietnam
increasing their orders that shortfall
should be covered
sooner rather than later let's go more
on the fallout
from the holding up of those imports in
china our business reporter stephen long
joins us now from
newcastle coal ports a very good
afternoon
what are people there saying about this
situation
in china
lorna the port has confirmed what the
shipping schedules have been saying
and that is that no coal has left the
port of newcastle
bound for china since the beginning of
december
the assumption was that that was because
they filled their annual quota
however the reports of a ban on
australian coal
put that in a whole new light now this
is the biggest coal port in the world
20 of the coal which leaves here is
normally bound
for china wow really interesting and
what what then are the likely knock-on
effects of it stephen
well interestingly lorna the port is
saying that
the coal that would have gone to china
has actually been taken by other markets
so
they haven't actually seen a drop off in
volume of exports
so far because the coal which was
destined for china has been picked up by
india singapore malaysia and a little
bit by the middle east because
it's very high quality thermal coal
going at a reasonable price
now that's good news but if the ban is
ongoing if there is an ongoing
restriction on coal exports
20 of the coal leaving this massive port
then
obviously it's going to have a massive
impact on the port
on the region and on the wider
australian
economy now at the moment
we're not seeing those volumes decline
but an ongoing ban would raise
really really significant questions for
for the entire region and thousands and
thousands of jobs
what does is the time frame for things
being
exported stephen does it sit there on
the dark side for some time
or does it immediately get shipped out
is it only brought to the port when it's
ready to go i mean
what might be a backlog should should
those exports stop
look normally the way it's operating at
the moment we saw in the past during the
massive cold boom from australia
many many ships off the coast but at the
moment basically ships are scheduled to
come in
they're filling up and leaving and it's
it's just a scheduled run if we get that
if we get that ban from china we'll know
about it soon enough
uh january they're expecting to find out
because they would be expecting new
orders
in january that
the situation is either that the ban is
ongoing that we're seeing a real
economic penalty being imposed by the
chinese regime
or that we get a return to something
approximating normal business
i guess the issue is that even if china
does ban
lorna because this is such high quality
coal amongst the highest quality thermal
coal in the world it's seen
as the benchmark coal for power stations
there will be other customers
for the coal nonetheless we're likely to
see a hit for the industry and the wider
economy
all right it's certainly something
stephen that the federal government is
very concerned about
at the moment our business reporter
stephen long is there at newcastle cole
port thank you stephen
there are calls today for more and
better indigenous controlled medical
services in australia after new research
found the majority of aboriginal
australians over the age of 60
are avoiding mainstream health care pat
turner
is ceo of the national aboriginal
community controlled health organization
i'm very pleased to uh that it has been
published at this time because it
affirms
you know the great work that our
aboriginal community
controlled health services do in
responding to the community's needs
and you know they work so hard at
getting that right
so i'm very pleased that the research
has found this or confirmed what we
already
know and
it is very important that the government
finally comes good
with the funding that is required
why is it that over the the decades
particularly older aboriginal people
have found it difficult to go
to mainstream medical services
well they have um um
um sorry they have uh
experienced a lot of discrimination uh
and uh a lot of racism and
they have very little trust uh in the
mainstream
and they don't feel they're going into a
culturally safe
environment as they would be in one of
our services
where you know our elders are highly
respected
highly regarded and we make sure we take
good care of them yeah okay so what what
can be done differently to embrace them
in this
well we're doing the best that we can
with the resources that we have
but let me point out that for every
dollar that the government spends on
the rest of the population we get a
dollar 20
whereas the burden of disease is 2.3
times higher
among our people than it is in the rest
of the australian population
and um it's therefore it's very
important
that the government fund us at least 2.3
2.30 per person rather than the
1.20 that they currently give us
are you getting anywhere do you feel
like you're banging your head against a
brick wall
uh look no uh we are slowly
uh getting somewhere the minister did
announce uh an additional 90 million at
the end of
last year at our conference in darwin
and that was very welcome
but it's a big there's still a long way
to go
but it's a step in the right direction
pat your organisation is meeting the
needs in in some areas where would you
say
is the greatest need now
ah look um there are so many issues that
are presented
and it really depends on the local
resources in terms of their
ability to respond appropriately
there's growing concerns in relation to
mental health
or you know the well-being of our people
and therefore um we certainly need more
targeted funding
to assist in that area pat we appreciate
you talking to us there pat turner is
ceo of the national aboriginal community
controlled health organization thank you
thank you lorna now it's been almost
three decades since the royal commission
handed down its black deaths in custody
report
to address a broken justice system
but 30 years on progress in the northern
territory
has been slow aboriginal people make up
30 percent of the territory's population
but account for 85 percent of prisoners
between 1991 and 2018
103 territorians died in custody
and 70 percent of them were aboriginal
arunda woman leanne little is trying to
turn that around she has spent
years traveling the territory to speak
two aboriginal people
about the justice system reporter
leticia lemke
went along to a visit through central
australia
leanne little has spent the past three
years crisscrossing the territory
to see where justice is going wrong it's
tragic i've probably seen
out of 80 odd communities that i've
visited
five functioning communities and they
were on the brink of whether they were
going to collapse or not
the government lawyer is working to pull
together an aboriginal justice agreement
to reduce the staggering incarceration
rates support local leadership
and improve government services these
kinds of agreements were created across
australia
in response to the royal commission into
aboriginal deaths in custody
but until now the northern territory has
failed to deliver one
almost 30 years after the commission
aboriginal people
account for 85 of prisoners and
almost all of the children in youth
detention
it's a shameful figure and we need to
address it we need to look at the causes
of offending and we actually need to
address
how can we fix this on the edge of the
tanamay desert in the community of
yuendumu
elders tell leanne an extreme shortage
of jobs
housing and rehabilitation programs is
fueling crime
everything said that's making us
disrespect our culture some of our young
people that do get into trouble
they don't have any other families that
can um you know talk to them
all their families have passed away
something so it's up to the next
generation
or family groups that can help them
eddie robertson's adopted grandson was
shot dead by police in an attempted
arrest here last year
the murder trial over comanji walker's
death is pending
and the wall pre-elder doesn't want to
talk about it but he tells leanne the
justice system needs fixing
i want to see the government to see the
laws that are there that's really
hurting us
and there are rules from there that they
can change it through constitution
i think you can turn this around in less
than five years
but you've gotta you know not be in
denial
and say that there's no racism in your
agency
or no racism in the northern territory
because there is
leanne is confident the agreement will
make change where other initiatives have
failed
if it's given the chance the next step
is
finalizing the agreement for government
and starting the tough talk on what
they'll agree to
fund leticia lemke abc news
and if you want to read more about
leanne's fight for justice the online
team has posted an extensive feature
article for our news website that's one
of the top stories there on abc.net dot
a u
slash news check it out
there have been allegations of water
theft mass fish deaths
devastated communities and industries on
the brink but
eight years in the 13 billion dollar
murray darling basin plan
is working at least that's what the
authority overseeing the plan's
implementation
says national rural reporter kath
sullivan
explains the murray-darling basin
authority has released this report card
at a pretty significant juncture
for what has been one of the major
environmental um
even community reforms that we've seen
in australia over the past
eight years and its chief executive phil
glyde says that australians should be
proud of the work that's been achieved
so far when we look at the water that's
been recovered for the environment
keeping in mind
this plan is about rebalancing the needs
of the environment with irrigators and
communities returning water to the
environment after
over extraction years and years of
over-extraction
we can see now that about 20 percent of
the water that irrigators were using
before the plan
commenced has been returned to the river
and the mdba says that should be
celebrated because that's helped to
cushion
large parts of the basin from the the
effects of